README.rst, before:

#################################################
Cumin - An automation and orchestration framework
#################################################

| |GitHub Release| |PyPI Release| |Build Status| |Coveralls Coverage| |Codcov Coverage| |Codacy| |Licence|

Summary
=======

Cumin provides a flexible and scalable automation framework to execute multiple commands on multiple hosts in parallel.

It allows to easily perform complex selections of hosts through a user-friendly query language which can
interface with different backend modules and combine their results for a fine grained selection. The transport layer
can also be selected, and can provide multiple execution strategies.

It can be used both via its command line interface (CLI) and as a Python library.

More details on the usage of Cumin in the Wikimedia Foundation are available on `Cumin's Wikitech page`_.

Main components
===============

Query language
--------------

Cumin provides a user-friendly generic query language that allows to combine the results of subqueries for multiple
backends.

- Each query part can be composed with the others using boolean operators (``and``, ``or``, ``and not``, ``xor``).
- Multiple query parts can be grouped together with parentheses (``(``, ``)``).
- Specific backend query (``I{backend-specific query syntax}``, where ``I`` is an identifier for the specific backend).
- Alias replacement, according to aliases defined in the configuration file (``A:group1``).
- The identifier ``A`` is reserved for the aliases replacement and cannot be used to identify a backend.
- If a ``default_backend`` is set in the configuration, it will try to execute the query first directly with the
  default backend and only if the query is not parsable with that backend it will try to execute it with the main
  grammar.
- A complex query example:
  ``(D{host1 or host2} and (P{R:Class = Role::MyClass} and not A:group1)) or D{host3}``

::

    Backus-Naur form (BNF) of the grammar:
            <grammar> ::= <item> | <item> <boolean> <grammar>
               <item> ::= <backend_query> | <alias> | "(" <grammar> ")"
      <backend_query> ::= <backend> "{" <query> "}"
              <alias> ::= A:<alias_name>
            <boolean> ::= "and not" | "and" | "xor" | "or"

Given that the ``pyparsing`` library defines the grammar in a BNF-like style, for the details of the tokens not
specified above check directly the source code in ``cumin/grammar.py``.

The ``Query`` class defined in ``cumin/query.py`` is the one taking care of replacing the aliases, building and
executing the query parts with their respective backends and aggregating the results. Once a query is executed, it
returns a `ClusterShell NodeSet`_ with the FQDN of the hosts that matches the selection.

Backends
--------

All the backends share a minimal common interface that is defined in the ``BaseQuery`` class defined in
``cumin/backends/__init__.py`` and they are instantiated by the ``Query`` class defined in ``cumin/query.py`` when
building and executing the query. Each backend module need to define a ``query_class`` module variable that is a
pointer to the backend class for dynamic instantiation and a ``GRAMMAR_PREFIX`` constant string that is the
identifier to be used in the main query syntax to identify the backend. The ``GRAMMAR_PREFIX`` ``A`` is reserved by
the main grammar for aliases. Some backends are optional, in the sense that their dependencies are not installed
automatically, they are available as an ``extras_require`` when installing from ``pip`` or as ``Recommended`` in the
debian package.

PuppetDB
^^^^^^^^

This backend uses the PuppetDB API to perform the query. The specific query language has this features:

- Each query part can be composed with the others using boolean operators (``and``, ``or``, ``not``)
- Multiple query parts can be grouped together with parentheses (``(``, ``)``).
- A query part can be of two different types:

  - ``Hostname matching``: this is a simple string that be used to match directly the hostname of the hosts in the
    selected backend. It allows for glob expansion (``*``) and the use of the powerful `ClusterShell NodeSet`_.
  - ``Category matching``: an identifier composed by a category, a colon and a key, followed by a comparison operator
    and a value, as in ``F:key = value``.

The available categories are:

- ``F``: for querying facts
- ``R``: for querying resources

The available operators are:

- ``=``: equality
- ``>=``: greater than or equal to
- ``<=``: less than or equal to
- ``<``: less than
- ``>``: greater than
- ``~``: regexp match

Some query examples:

- All hosts: ``*``
- Hosts globbing: ``host10*``
- `ClusterShell NodeSet`_ for hosts expansion: ``host10[10-42].domain``
- Category based key-value selection:

  - ``R:Resource::Name``: query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Resource::Name``.
  - ``R:Resource::Name = 'resource-title'``: query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Resource::Name``
    whose title is ``resource-title``. For example ``R:Class = MyModule::MyClass``.
  - ``R:Resource::Name@field = 'some-value'``: query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Resource::Name``
    whose field ``field`` has the value ``some-value``. The valid fields are: ``tag``, ``certname``, ``type``,
    ``title``, ``exported``, ``file``, ``line``. The previous syntax is a shortcut for this one with the field
    ``title``.
  - ``R:Resource::Name%param = 'some-value'``: query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Resource::Name``
    whose parameter ``param`` has the value ``some-value``.

- Mixed facts/resources queries are not supported, but the same result can be achieved by the main grammar using
  multiple subqueries.
- A complex selection for facts:
  ``host10[10-42].*.domain or (not F:key1 = value1 and host10*) or (F:key2 > value2 and F:key3 ~ '^value[0-9]+')``

::

    Backus-Naur form (BNF) of the grammar:
          <grammar> ::= <item> | <item> <and_or> <grammar>
             <item> ::= [<neg>] <query-token> | [<neg>] "(" <grammar> ")"
      <query-token> ::= <token> | <hosts>
            <token> ::= <category>:<key> [<operator> <value>]

Given that the ``pyparsing`` library used to define the grammar uses a BNF-like style, for the details of the tokens
not specified above see directly the code in ``cumin/backends/puppetdb.py``.

OpenStack
^^^^^^^^^

This `optional` backend uses the OpenStack APIs to perform the query. The specific query language has this features:

- Each query can specify multiple parameters to filter the hosts selection in the form ``key:value``.
- The special ``project`` key allow to filter by the OpenStack project name: ``project:project_name``. If not
  specified all the visible and enabled projects will be queried.
- Any other ``key:value`` pair will be passed as is to the `OpenStack list-servers API`_. Multiple filters can be
  added separated by space. The value can be enclosed in single or double quotes: ``name:"host1.*\.domain" image:UUID``
- By default the filters ``status:ACTIVE`` and ``vm_state:ACTIVE`` are also added, but will be overridden if specified
  in the query.
- To mix multiple selections the general grammar must be used with multiple subqueries:
  ``O{project:project1} or O{project:project2}``
- The special query ``*`` is a shortcut to select all hosts in all OpenStack projects.
- See the example configuration in ``doc/examples/config.yaml`` for all the OpenStack-related parameters that can be
  set.

::

    Backus-Naur form (BNF) of the grammar:
            <grammar> ::= "*" | <items>
              <items> ::= <item> | <item> <whitespace> <items>
               <item> ::= <key>:<value>

Given that the ``pyparsing`` library used to define the grammar uses a BNF-like style, for the details of the tokens
not specified above see directly the code in ``cumin/backends/openstack.py``.

Direct
^^^^^^

The ``direct`` backend allow to use Cumin without any external dependency for the hosts selection. It allow to write
arbitrarily complex queries with subgroups and boolean operators, but each item must be either the hostname itself,
or the using host expansion using the powerful `ClusterShell NodeSet`_ syntax.

The typical usage for the ``direct`` backend is as a reliable alternative in cases in which the primary host
selection mechanism is not working and also for testing the transports without any external backend dependency.

Some query examples:

- Simple selection: ``host1.domain``
- ClusterShell syntax for hosts expansion: ``host10[10-42].domain,host2010.other-domain``
- A complex selection:
  ``host100[1-5].domain or (host10[30-40].domain and (host10[10-42].domain and not host33.domain))``

::

    Backus-Naur form (BNF) of the grammar:
            <grammar> ::= <item> | <item> <boolean> <grammar>
               <item> ::= <hosts> | "(" <grammar> ")"
            <boolean> ::= "and not" | "and" | "xor" | "or"

Given that the ``pyparsing`` library used to define the grammar usesa BNF-like style, for the details of the tokens
not specified above check directly the source code in ``cumin/backends/direct.py``.

Transports
----------

The transport layer is the one used to convey the commands to be executed into the selected hosts. The transport
abstraction allow to specify a mode to choose the execution plan, an event handler class and a success threshold.
Those can be used by the chosen transport to customize the behavior of the execution plan.

All the transports share a common interface that is defined in the ``BaseWorker`` class defined in
``cumin/transports/__init__.py`` and they are instantiated through the ``Transport`` factory class defined in
``cumin/transport.py``. Each backend module need to define a ``worker_class`` module variable that is a pointer to
the transport class for dynamic instantiation.

ClusterShell
^^^^^^^^^^^^

This transport uses the `ClusterShell <https://github.com/cea-hpc/clustershell>`__ Python library to connect to the
selected hosts and execute a list of commands. This transport accept the following customizations:

- ``sync`` execution mode: given a list of commands, the first one will be executed on all the hosts, then, if the
  success ratio is reached, the second one will be executed on all hosts where the first one was successful, and so on
- ``async`` execution mode: given a list of commands, on each hosts the commands will be executed sequentially,
  interrupting the execution on any single host at the first command that fails. The execution on the hosts is
  independent between each other.
- custom execution mode: can be achieved creating a custom event handler class that extends the ``BaseEventHandler``
  class defined in ``cumin/transports/clustershell.py``, implementing its abstract methods and setting to this class
  object the handler to the transport.

Installation
============

From the Python Package Index (PyPI)::

    pip install cumin

Optional backends are available as ``extras_require`` and can be installed with::

    pip install cumin[with-openstack]

From the source code in the ``master`` branch::

    python setup.py install

Is it also possible to build a Debian package using the ``debian`` branch, for example with ``gbp buildpackage``.

Configuration
=============

The default configuration file for ``cumin`` is expected to be found at ``/etc/cumin/config.yaml``. The path can
be changed in the CLI via a command-line switch, ``--config``. A commented example configuration is available in
``doc/examples/config.yaml``.

Cumin will also automatically load any aliases defined in a ``aliases.yaml`` file, if present in the same directory
of the main configuration file. An aliases example file is available in ``doc/examples/aliases.yaml``.

CLI
===

Usage
-----

::

    cumin [OPTIONS] HOSTS COMMAND [COMMAND ...]

OPTIONS
^^^^^^^

For the full list of available optional arguments see ``cumin --help``.

Mode
''''

The ``-m/--mode`` argument is required when multiple COMMANDS are specified and defines the mode of execution:

- ``sync``: execute the first command on all hosts, then proceed with the next one only if ``-s/--success-percentage``
  is reached.
- ``async``: execute on each host, independently from each other, the list of commands, aborting the execution on any
  given host at the first command that fails.

Positional arguments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

HOSTS
'''''

A host selection query according to a custom grammar. The hosts selection query is executed against the configured
backend to extract the list of hosts to use as target.

COMMAND
'''''''

A command to be executed on all the target hosts in parallel, according to the configuration and options selected.
Multiple commands will be executed sequentially.

Running tests
=============

The ``tox`` utility, a wrapper around virtualenv, is used to run the
test. To list the default environements run by tox::

    tox -lv

To list all the available environments::

    tox -av

To run one specific environment only::

    tox -e flake8

You can pass extra arguments to the underlying command::

    # Run only tests in a specific file:
    tox -e unit -- -k test_puppetdb.py

    # Run only one specific test:
    tox -e unit -- -k test_invalid_grammars

Also integration tests are available, but not run by default by tox. They depends on a running Docker instance. To run
them::

    tox -e integration


.. |GitHub Release| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/release/wikimedia/cumin.svg
   :target: https://github.com/wikimedia/cumin/releases
.. |PyPI Release| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/cumin.svg
   :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/cumin
.. |Build Status| image:: https://travis-ci.org/wikimedia/cumin.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://travis-ci.org/wikimedia/cumin
.. |Coveralls Coverage| image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/wikimedia/cumin/badge.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://coveralls.io/github/wikimedia/cumin
.. |Codcov Coverage| image:: https://codecov.io/github/wikimedia/cumin/coverage.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://codecov.io/github/wikimedia/cumin
.. |Codacy| image:: https://api.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/73d9a429dc7343eb935471bf05826fc0
   :target: https://www.codacy.com/app/volans-/cumin
.. |Licence| image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPLv3%2B-blue.svg
   :target: https://github.com/wikimedia/cumin/blob/master/LICENSE

.. _`Cumin's Wikitech page`: https://wikitech.wikimedia.org/wiki/Cumin
.. _`ClusterShell NodeSet`: https://clustershell.readthedocs.io/en/v1.7.3/api/NodeSet.html#ClusterShell.NodeSet.NodeSet
.. _`OpenStack list-servers API`: https://developer.openstack.org/api-ref/compute/#list-servers

Commit message:

PuppetDB backend: Class, Roles and Profiles shortcuts
* It is becoming common practice to use the role/profile paradigm in
  Puppet, where each host has only one role named Role::Module::Name
  that includes multiple profiles of the type Profile::Module::Name.
  If this practice is used, queries for those resources in Cumin will be
  very common and not user-friendly, requiring to write queries of the
  type: R:Class = Role::Module::Name.
  Add support to Roles and Profiles so that they can be queried via
  shortcuts with 'O:Module::Name' for roles and 'P:Module::Name' for
  profiles.
* Add also a generic class shortcut to quickly query a
  class resource with C:class_name or C:path::to::class.
* The special syntax for fields (@field) and parameters (%param) are
  also supported. When querying for any of the above shortcuts, like
  'P:Module::Name%param = value', the query will include two subqueries
  in AND between them, one for the class title and the other for the
  class parameter.

Bug: T178279
Change-Id: I74451ee4b59f61bd379d21e99e2d4e9b43264d2c

README.rst, after:

#################################################
Cumin - An automation and orchestration framework
#################################################

| |GitHub Release| |PyPI Release| |Build Status| |Coveralls Coverage| |Codcov Coverage| |Codacy| |Licence|

Summary
=======

Cumin provides a flexible and scalable automation framework to execute multiple commands on multiple hosts in parallel.

It allows to easily perform complex selections of hosts through a user-friendly query language which can
interface with different backend modules and combine their results for a fine grained selection. The transport layer
can also be selected, and can provide multiple execution strategies.

It can be used both via its command line interface (CLI) and as a Python library.

More details on the usage of Cumin in the Wikimedia Foundation are available on `Cumin's Wikitech page`_.

Main components
===============

Query language
--------------

Cumin provides a user-friendly generic query language that allows to combine the results of subqueries for multiple
backends.

- Each query part can be composed with the others using boolean operators (``and``, ``or``, ``and not``, ``xor``).
- Multiple query parts can be grouped together with parentheses (``(``, ``)``).
- Specific backend query (``I{backend-specific query syntax}``, where ``I`` is an identifier for the specific backend).
- Alias replacement, according to aliases defined in the configuration file (``A:group1``).
- The identifier ``A`` is reserved for the aliases replacement and cannot be used to identify a backend.
- If a ``default_backend`` is set in the configuration, it will try to execute the query first directly with the
  default backend and only if the query is not parsable with that backend it will try to execute it with the main
  grammar.
- A complex query example:
  ``(D{host1 or host2} and (P{R:Class = Role::MyClass} and not A:group1)) or D{host3}``

::

    Backus-Naur form (BNF) of the grammar:
            <grammar> ::= <item> | <item> <boolean> <grammar>
               <item> ::= <backend_query> | <alias> | "(" <grammar> ")"
      <backend_query> ::= <backend> "{" <query> "}"
              <alias> ::= A:<alias_name>
            <boolean> ::= "and not" | "and" | "xor" | "or"

Given that the ``pyparsing`` library defines the grammar in a BNF-like style, for the details of the tokens not
specified above check directly the source code in ``cumin/grammar.py``.

The ``Query`` class defined in ``cumin/query.py`` is the one taking care of replacing the aliases, building and
executing the query parts with their respective backends and aggregating the results. Once a query is executed, it
returns a `ClusterShell NodeSet`_ with the FQDN of the hosts that matches the selection.

Backends
--------

All the backends share a minimal common interface that is defined in the ``BaseQuery`` class defined in
``cumin/backends/__init__.py`` and they are instantiated by the ``Query`` class defined in ``cumin/query.py`` when
building and executing the query. Each backend module need to define a ``query_class`` module variable that is a
pointer to the backend class for dynamic instantiation and a ``GRAMMAR_PREFIX`` constant string that is the
identifier to be used in the main query syntax to identify the backend. The ``GRAMMAR_PREFIX`` ``A`` is reserved by
the main grammar for aliases. Some backends are optional, in the sense that their dependencies are not installed
automatically, they are available as an ``extras_require`` when installing from ``pip`` or as ``Recommended`` in the
debian package.

PuppetDB
^^^^^^^^

This backend uses the PuppetDB API to perform the query. The specific query language has this features:

- Each query part can be composed with the others using boolean operators (``and``, ``or``, ``not``)
- Multiple query parts can be grouped together with parentheses (``(``, ``)``).
- A query part can be of two different types:

  - ``Hostname matching``: this is a simple string that be used to match directly the hostname of the hosts in the
    selected backend. It allows for glob expansion (``*``) and the use of the powerful `ClusterShell NodeSet`_.
  - ``Category matching``: an identifier composed by a category, a colon and a key, followed by a comparison operator
    and a value, as in ``F:key = value``.

The available categories are:

- ``C``: shortcut for querying resources of type ``Class``
- ``F``: for querying facts
- ``O``: shortcut for querying resources of type ``Class`` that starts with ``Role::``
- ``P``: shortcut for querying resources of type ``Class`` that starts with ``Profile::``
- ``R``: for querying generic resources

The available operators are:

- ``=``: equality
- ``>=``: greater than or equal to
- ``<=``: less than or equal to
- ``<``: less than
- ``>``: greater than
- ``~``: regexp match

Some query examples:

- All hosts: ``*``
- Hosts globbing: ``host10*``
- `ClusterShell NodeSet`_ for hosts expansion: ``host10[10-42].domain``
- Category based key-value selection:

  - ``R:Resource::Name``: query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Resource::Name``.
  - ``R:Resource::Name = 'resource-title'``: query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Resource::Name``
    whose title is ``resource-title``. For example ``R:Class = MyModule::MyClass``.
  - ``R:Resource::Name@field = 'some-value'``: query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Resource::Name``
    whose field ``field`` has the value ``some-value``. The valid fields are: ``tag``, ``certname``, ``type``,
    ``title``, ``exported``, ``file``, ``line``. The previous syntax is a shortcut for this one with the field
    ``title``.
  - ``R:Resource::Name%param = 'some-value'``: query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Resource::Name``
    whose parameter ``param`` has the value ``some-value``.

  - ``C:Class::Name``: special shortcut to query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Class`` whose name
    is ``Class::Name``. The ``Class::Name`` part is completely arbitrary and depends on the puppet hierarchy
    chosen. It's equivalent to ``R:Class = Class::Name``, with the addition that the ``param`` and ``field``
    selectors described above can be used directly without the need to add another condition.
  - ``O:Module::Name``: special shortcut to query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Class`` whose name
    is ``Role::Module::Name``. The ``Module::Name`` part is completely arbitrary and depends on the puppet
    hierarchy chosen. It's equivalent to ``R:Class = Role::Module::Name``, with the addition that the ``param`` and
    ``field`` selectors described above can be used directly without the need to add another condition, although
    usually roles should not have parameters in the role/profile Puppet paradigm.
  - ``P:Module::Name``: special shortcut to query all the hosts that have a resource of type ``Class`` whose name
    is ``Profile::Module::Name``. The ``Module::Name`` part is completely arbitrary and depends on the puppet
    hierarchy chosen. It's equivalent to ``R:Class = Profile::Module::Name``, with the addition that the ``param``
    and ``field`` selectors described above can be used directly without the need to add another condition.
  - ``F:FactName = value``: query all the hosts that have a fact ``FactName``, as reported by facter, with the
    value ``value``.
  - Mixed facts/resources queries are not supported, but the same result can be achieved using the main grammar
    with multiple subqueries for the PuppetDB backend.

- A complex selection for facts:
  ``host10[10-42].*.domain or (not F:key1 = value1 and host10*) or (F:key2 > value2 and F:key3 ~ '^value[0-9]+')``

::

    Backus-Naur form (BNF) of the grammar:
          <grammar> ::= <item> | <item> <and_or> <grammar>
             <item> ::= [<neg>] <query-token> | [<neg>] "(" <grammar> ")"
      <query-token> ::= <token> | <hosts>
            <token> ::= <category>:<key> [<operator> <value>]

Given that the ``pyparsing`` library used to define the grammar uses a BNF-like style, for the details of the tokens
not specified above see directly the code in ``cumin/backends/puppetdb.py``.

OpenStack
^^^^^^^^^

This `optional` backend uses the OpenStack APIs to perform the query. The specific query language has this features:

- Each query can specify multiple parameters to filter the hosts selection in the form ``key:value``.
- The special ``project`` key allow to filter by the OpenStack project name: ``project:project_name``. If not
  specified all the visible and enabled projects will be queried.
- Any other ``key:value`` pair will be passed as is to the `OpenStack list-servers API`_. Multiple filters can be
  added separated by space. The value can be enclosed in single or double quotes: ``name:"host1.*\.domain" image:UUID``
- By default the filters ``status:ACTIVE`` and ``vm_state:ACTIVE`` are also added, but will be overridden if specified
  in the query.
- To mix multiple selections the general grammar must be used with multiple subqueries:
  ``O{project:project1} or O{project:project2}``
- The special query ``*`` is a shortcut to select all hosts in all OpenStack projects.
- See the example configuration in ``doc/examples/config.yaml`` for all the OpenStack-related parameters that can be
  set.

::

    Backus-Naur form (BNF) of the grammar:
            <grammar> ::= "*" | <items>
              <items> ::= <item> | <item> <whitespace> <items>
               <item> ::= <key>:<value>

Given that the ``pyparsing`` library used to define the grammar uses a BNF-like style, for the details of the tokens
not specified above see directly the code in ``cumin/backends/openstack.py``.

Direct
^^^^^^

The ``direct`` backend allow to use Cumin without any external dependency for the hosts selection. It allow to write
arbitrarily complex queries with subgroups and boolean operators, but each item must be either the hostname itself,
or the using host expansion using the powerful `ClusterShell NodeSet`_ syntax.

The typical usage for the ``direct`` backend is as a reliable alternative in cases in which the primary host
selection mechanism is not working and also for testing the transports without any external backend dependency.

Some query examples:

- Simple selection: ``host1.domain``
- ClusterShell syntax for hosts expansion: ``host10[10-42].domain,host2010.other-domain``
- A complex selection:
  ``host100[1-5].domain or (host10[30-40].domain and (host10[10-42].domain and not host33.domain))``

::

    Backus-Naur form (BNF) of the grammar:
            <grammar> ::= <item> | <item> <boolean> <grammar>
               <item> ::= <hosts> | "(" <grammar> ")"
            <boolean> ::= "and not" | "and" | "xor" | "or"

Given that the ``pyparsing`` library used to define the grammar usesa BNF-like style, for the details of the tokens
not specified above check directly the source code in ``cumin/backends/direct.py``.

Transports
----------

The transport layer is the one used to convey the commands to be executed into the selected hosts. The transport
abstraction allow to specify a mode to choose the execution plan, an event handler class and a success threshold.
Those can be used by the chosen transport to customize the behavior of the execution plan.

All the transports share a common interface that is defined in the ``BaseWorker`` class defined in
``cumin/transports/__init__.py`` and they are instantiated through the ``Transport`` factory class defined in
``cumin/transport.py``. Each backend module need to define a ``worker_class`` module variable that is a pointer to
the transport class for dynamic instantiation.

ClusterShell
^^^^^^^^^^^^

This transport uses the `ClusterShell <https://github.com/cea-hpc/clustershell>`__ Python library to connect to the
selected hosts and execute a list of commands. This transport accept the following customizations:

- ``sync`` execution mode: given a list of commands, the first one will be executed on all the hosts, then, if the
  success ratio is reached, the second one will be executed on all hosts where the first one was successful, and so on
- ``async`` execution mode: given a list of commands, on each hosts the commands will be executed sequentially,
  interrupting the execution on any single host at the first command that fails. The execution on the hosts is
  independent between each other.
- custom execution mode: can be achieved creating a custom event handler class that extends the ``BaseEventHandler``
  class defined in ``cumin/transports/clustershell.py``, implementing its abstract methods and setting to this class
  object the handler to the transport.

Installation
============

From the Python Package Index (PyPI)::

    pip install cumin

Optional backends are available as ``extras_require`` and can be installed with::

    pip install cumin[with-openstack]

From the source code in the ``master`` branch::

    python setup.py install

Is it also possible to build a Debian package using the ``debian`` branch, for example with ``gbp buildpackage``.

Configuration
=============

The default configuration file for ``cumin`` is expected to be found at ``/etc/cumin/config.yaml``. The path can
be changed in the CLI via a command-line switch, ``--config``. A commented example configuration is available in
``doc/examples/config.yaml``.

Cumin will also automatically load any aliases defined in a ``aliases.yaml`` file, if present in the same directory
of the main configuration file. An aliases example file is available in ``doc/examples/aliases.yaml``.

CLI
===

Usage
-----

::

    cumin [OPTIONS] HOSTS COMMAND [COMMAND ...]

OPTIONS
^^^^^^^

For the full list of available optional arguments see ``cumin --help``.

Mode
''''

The ``-m/--mode`` argument is required when multiple COMMANDS are specified and defines the mode of execution:

- ``sync``: execute the first command on all hosts, then proceed with the next one only if ``-s/--success-percentage``
  is reached.
- ``async``: execute on each host, independently from each other, the list of commands, aborting the execution on any
  given host at the first command that fails.

Positional arguments
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

HOSTS
'''''

A host selection query according to a custom grammar. The hosts selection query is executed against the configured
backend to extract the list of hosts to use as target.

COMMAND
'''''''

A command to be executed on all the target hosts in parallel, according to the configuration and options selected.
Multiple commands will be executed sequentially.

Running tests
=============

The ``tox`` utility, a wrapper around virtualenv, is used to run the
test. To list the default environements run by tox::

    tox -lv

To list all the available environments::

    tox -av

To run one specific environment only::

    tox -e flake8

You can pass extra arguments to the underlying command::

    # Run only tests in a specific file:
    tox -e unit -- -k test_puppetdb.py

    # Run only one specific test:
    tox -e unit -- -k test_invalid_grammars

Also integration tests are available, but not run by default by tox. They depends on a running Docker instance. To run
them::

    tox -e integration


.. |GitHub Release| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/release/wikimedia/cumin.svg
   :target: https://github.com/wikimedia/cumin/releases
.. |PyPI Release| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/cumin.svg
   :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/cumin
.. |Build Status| image:: https://travis-ci.org/wikimedia/cumin.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://travis-ci.org/wikimedia/cumin
.. |Coveralls Coverage| image:: https://coveralls.io/repos/github/wikimedia/cumin/badge.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://coveralls.io/github/wikimedia/cumin
.. |Codcov Coverage| image:: https://codecov.io/github/wikimedia/cumin/coverage.svg?branch=master
   :target: https://codecov.io/github/wikimedia/cumin
.. |Codacy| image:: https://api.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/73d9a429dc7343eb935471bf05826fc0
   :target: https://www.codacy.com/app/volans-/cumin
.. |Licence| image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPLv3%2B-blue.svg
   :target: https://github.com/wikimedia/cumin/blob/master/LICENSE

.. _`Cumin's Wikitech page`: https://wikitech.wikimedia.org/wiki/Cumin
.. _`ClusterShell NodeSet`: https://clustershell.readthedocs.io/en/v1.7.3/api/NodeSet.html#ClusterShell.NodeSet.NodeSet
.. _`OpenStack list-servers API`: https://developer.openstack.org/api-ref/compute/#list-servers
